At this point had the responsibility that I did
when I was associate director, namely budgets and
preparing requests
to go to the legislature and essentially looking
over the projects and lining up things. Who did
A&M's legislative work then? Who were the key Who
were the key folks? Bob Cherry. Bob Cherry. He
worked the legislature and also was the
right-hand man for the board? That's right.
And did he keep you and others well informed?
Not really.
Did you as a new senior administrator get any
advice or direction or guidelines from board
members or legislators or former students? Not
from former students, but from the legislators,
yes, and from the board members, yes. Can you
mention some key people that attempted to give you
guidance?
I think the board as a whole tried to give me
guidance. You see, at that particular point, we
did something. Patterson had really started it.
And that was to take this huge monstrosity or this
huge mix of things that we had of stations out in the
Experiment Station and convert them to a much
smaller group, which he called Research and
Extension Centers.
And
when I was still associate director, I went up with
Earl Rudder one day. We used to call him the East
Texas Pasture Research Station, Research
Center, and this kind of a thing. And that summer, a
curious kind of occurrence happened was that the
Texas Sheep and Goat Raisers Association met. And
they there, they were at that time, maybe they
still are, quite a resolutionizing group
of people. And
so they resolved And one of the resolutions was to
give, criticize Texas A&M University and the
university system very heavily for not being
responsible to the sheep and goat raisers. At the
same time, they were very
complimentary of the station out at San Angelo was
doing the kind of work they were doing. You see,
what they were doing was they were not, in their
minds, they were separating these stations from
the main center. So coming back from a visit with
the folks at Monday, which was another political
situation, Earl Runner leaned over to me and he
says, why don't you call all of these people, why
don't you call all these centers, Texas A&M
Center, at so-and-so. So I went back and drafted
and had a secretary to do just the first draft of
things. And I said, is this what you mean? He says,
yeah, give it to me. And before I knew it, the Board
of Regents
had approved all of these names.
So one fell swoop, it became Texas A&M University
Research and Extension, Agricultural Research
and Extension at Lubbock, Agricultural Research
and Extension at this. And so it was at this point
that I decided, well, we were really going to put
these things in place. So I appointed a committee
to go around to these various places, and I said,
you know, we have problems of locations. because
the legislators
in many aspects of the situation believe that
these centers ought to be in the middle of the
agricultural world.
And I wasn't quite sure about that, so I set this
committee out and they came back and they said
these centers need to be associated with cities,
which I agreed with. And the principal reason for
putting these centers at these cities was that the
faculty, we could hire reasonably good faculty if
they could have reasonably good areas to live in.
But if they had to live in Chillicothe or some other
outlying places, a few people like the range
scientists and the animal husbandmen, You could
put out at those places, but agronomists, no. You
just were loaded. So I decided we were going to
locate. Well, it...
became quite a football player at that point as we
went along. We were able to pick up the Renner
Foundation, which is located in Renner, north of
Dallas, and convert it to Texas A&M University
Agricultural Research and Extension Center at
Dallas. And it's next door to the University of
Texas at Dallas.
So from place to place we were able to establish and
get people to give land, to get people to give money
for our buildings, and you could put up a pretty
good building for $200,000 in those particular
days and time. And the original location of all of
these research units had been political long ago,
wasn't it? They were political long ago, and they
remain political as far as this is concerned. And
the most political of the one was the one at U Valley
which should have been at San Antonio and the one at
Chillicothe which should have been at Wichita
Falls. Well,
Dolph Briscoe was governor at that particular
point and so the board decided They took that away
from me and decided we were going to move to U
Valley. And they said, you build it there and you
build it in a hurry. So I had a way of doing that. I got
the board to accept an architect that had been at
another place. And they said, you duplicate this
building right here. So you find now that the
agricultural research and extension centers are
across the state. Probably as much of a political
situation. Now there's political visibility.
The one in Dallas now is completely surrounded by
urban
areas. It's a green area. And I'm assuming that the
realities of that situation in Texas are very
little different from any other state. Wouldn't
this be about the same in other states? You mean the
location? Yeah. There are no, this is the only
state that has that kind of setup. Oh, really? Yes.
And that's actually, I think, one of my greatest
achievements as an administrator. Do we have more
locations than per capita or fewer? Well,
Probably so. Probably more? You see, California
had some, and most of those eventually became
University of California at so-and-so, and
various places of that sort. Florida had what they
call A-R-E-C, agricultural research
extensions. My concept was that these need to be
educational centers as well as research centers.
In that year before Mr. Rutter's illness, or two
years, did you and O.D. Butler and Mr. Rutter
sometimes go to reserve meetings together? Only
Only as the division met. And that was how often?
Once a year. Oh, okay.
Did you ever see, did Mr. Rutter have much of a sense
of humor? Did you ever see him? I've heard him
laugh, yes.
When did you see him really get angry over
something? Really unhappy? I don't know that I
ever did. I did see him in action as a political
person. Oh, describe that. And he went to, well
there was a bit of money being made available to the
Department of Interior for water research and the
enabling legislation nationally, sort of put it
at the Land Grant University, but we had some
trouble with the possibility that some of this
stuff could go out to Texas Tech.
And so the legislature was, and the senator who had
built this, putting this bill in to move it
someplace, Earl Rudder went down to see him, and
you should have seen the shouting that went on in
that one. But that was the only time I'd ever seen or
heard Earl Rudder shout. And which board? Senator
Krueger, by the way. Senator Krueger. What about
our local legislative delegation, Bill Moore and
and various state representatives. Did you see
them in action much during the Rutter years? Yes.
Describe. I think fundamentally Bill Moore was as
much of a supporter of this university as any, and
the fact is he didn't like for anything to be
outside of this College Station Bryan. And so
anything here he would, he would support anything
away. He would drag foot. And did you work at all
with Brownrick Dewey? Yes, I had Brownie, yes. He
was quietly efficient, wasn't he? Quietly
efficient, yes. Did you, in those, in the 60s, did
any board member ever deal with you directly, or
did they go through Mr. Rudder appropriately?
They came at me directly. Is that right? Yeah. What
were their concerns? Oh, usually small
directions and this kind of a thing. Did they ever
try to
tell you what to fund or who to appoint? No. They
didn't get involved in the details? They didn't
get involved in the whole situation. Did you go to
board meetings in those, in the voter years? I went
to board meetings in those days. And he, as a matter
of fact, is the associate director of the station.
I went to the executive committee and Errol
Rudder's executive committee meetings.
Describe those. Who was at his executive
committee meetings? The four or five deans and two
associate directors.
Were there minutes kept? Were there votes taken? I
think so, I think so, but most of it you'd have
people like Fred Benson. We'd talk softly at him.
Patterson was pretty quiet. Which of those
individuals do you think Earl Rudder listened to
most? I'd say Fred Benson. I would have been
surprised if you had not.
Why was Benson so effective? He was quiet and very
logical.
Highly logical.
He and I, I enjoyed being with him as a co-dean,
as a level, not as a co-dean, but at the same... Oh,
oh, oh, I was trying to figure out what word you were
saying. You were saying as a fellow dean, yeah.
Fellow dean, is what I meant to say.
Was he your favorite colleague? He had to be, yeah.
Did y'all ever get together socially, you deans
and directors? In the Earl Rudder days, yes. In the
Jack Williams days, yes. And heads of departments
used to get together socially. We'd have social
events when I was dean. Where were they held? At
various homes, mostly. Coat and tie? Coat and tie.
Were alcoholic beverages served? Sometimes. I
remember Fred Benson saying that when he first got
here, if you served alcoholic beverages, you
closed the shades.
Probably so. In those, in the 60s, where did you and
other couples, where did you all go eat, if you're
going to eat, you're going to dine out?
Coach Norton's. Okay.
Tom's.
At about that time, well in the 60s, about that time
some of the clubs were being developed. And what
were the events on campus that you and your spouses
normally attended? Oh, student club banquets and
things of the sort, particularly in April we were
going. And then, of course, our old rudder would
have a dinner for somebody. Did
the rudders ever have a dinner for the deans and so
forth at the old president's house?
I don't know. I don't recall. I don't either. Did
you as dean go to the Ag Ball? Did faculty and
students? and administrators go to the boot dance
and the ring dance and things like that? We had
invitations to all of them. But did you go? Oh, yes.
Oh, did you? Okay. Cotton ball, that's what I was
trying to think of. Cotton ball. Now, that was a big
event, wasn't it? That was a big event. Of course,
that died under my years. I finally killed it.
Well, it just withered away, didn't it? It just
withered away, yeah. As in your first... months or
years of being of having these big
responsibilities what were some of the first real
difficult matters that you had to deal with the one
you mentioned was the the the locations and all of
that well political locations with the centers
and things predominant things what about
research topics and projects uh
I don't know that I dealt with them, but I don't know
that it was considered a problem. One of the things
was that I became an administrator. I decided that
the College of Agriculture
was going to have to move toward the scientific
group. And as we replaced faculty, we would move
more and more into the scientific area. I had some
difficulty problems with finding somebody to
head the Department of Biochemistry. because I
didn't know all of these situations. Sometimes I
find a difficulty of finding heads of departments
moving in, particularly in some of these others.
We didn't use the committee system. I found it very
useful later on as far as the approach was
concerned. I lost a lot of confidence in the
committee system when we through the years,
largely because they could be managed by
people who had certain concerns and things of the
sort, and sometimes you had to take over if you were
going to change direction, you were going to have
to do this through the head of the department.
In biochemistry, what were you hoping at the time
you said the problem, what was the problem? Well,
the problem was to try to find somebody who could
lead the department toward science and upgraded
in science. And we eventually, I eventually did
this. I did get a hold of Gene Santer, who is now Dean
of Agriculture at the University of Arizona. But
Gene, he wasn't as strong a biochemist as the
faculty would have liked and so forth. But he did
turn it around, and of course the Department of
Biochemistry now is largely a molecular biology
department. And what has bothered me a little bit
about the change is that the momentum, which I
think I started,
essentially ended up the legacy. It was called the
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences. That
was an interesting battle. Describe that. Well,
of course, the people in science, Dean Fackler, I
tried it for 20 years, and first I couldn't get my
own faculty, my own heads of departments,
essentially, to move in that direction. And I'd
propose ideas and get absolute results. I'd drop
them, and I'd come back a little bit later. As we
went into it, essentially, I had a decision that I
was going to make this. By that time, I was just
dean. I didn't have any responsibilities as far as
Experiment Station or Extension Service was
concerned. And even Clark held a meeting of
holding this kind of thing. Richardson took a
negativity to it, obviously. Fackler didn't want
it.
But things got so bad in the department of biology
that they essentially
were no longer supporting, the biologists were no
longer supporting the dean of science. And when I
saw that happening, I immediately shoved it in. Of
course, that was the end of my career as dean.
Charlie Arnson carried on and it was made so the
name Agriculture and Life Sciences and I have the
title of Dean Emeritus, Agriculture and Life
Sciences and Agriculture. This is a note for the
typist that you don't need to put in the
typescript. It's an attempt at dry humor at
Missouri one day as they were talking about adding
something like that to the title College of
Agriculture. with a straight face at a large
gathering, I proposed that they consider
renaming it Food, Agriculture, and Resource
Management. And then I asked them to consider what
the acronym would be. And a few people from across
the state thought that F-A-R-M would be a very
good.
All right, let's go back chronologically then Mr.
Rudder becomes ill in early 1970. Right. Were you
and your colleagues aware soon before his illness
that he was? I had no idea, as a matter of fact. I had
been on a foreign assignment, been out of the
country. I came back and I got a call in Chicago that
Mr. Rutter wanted me to go to East Pakistan,
Bangladesh. And because our project was coming to
an end there,
He wanted me to go, and then they told me he was in the
hospital in Houston. And that was the last we ever
saw of him. I never did see him after that.
So he sent, the last thing he did was send me to Asia.
Then we have a brief- By the way, I was not
successful. And I'll tell you why I wasn't
successful. And it
should have given us a lesson to learn. When we had
the contract to improve the faculty at East
Pakistan Agricultural University, we trained
every one of those PhDs here.
And so what they got in was a bunch of Aggies against
the European-trained people, and the chancellor
didn't want any more of that. Or the vice
chancellor, I should say. Who was that? That's the
vice chancellor in the East Pakistan
Agricultural University, the Bangladesh
Agricultural University. I thought you meant
here. I thought you meant
here. Mr. Rutter died. We had a period of an interim
president, and then Jack Williams is selected to
begin in the fall of 1970, November the 1st. Do you
remember what your first reactions were to his
appointment? My first reaction was very
positive. As a matter of fact, He came down after
his appointment. I was in the administration and
he poked his head in my office and said, I'm joining
you. Describe, make believe I'd never seen him or
known his personality, describe what he looked
like and how he handled himself.
He behaved himself as a real academic. I'm not sure
I could describe his physiognomy.
He was clearly one who supported me as dean. And
I could go to him and we'd talk things over. His
office was right above mine.
I considered him tall.
Fairly lean.
Did he seem to understand the realities of
agriculture far more than any other president has
ever done since, including, well, I'm on your
side. I agree. Did he ever smile? Oh, yeah. Sure.
Yes. And
did he make an effort, as far as you were aware, to
learn about the realities of our agriculture
programs? Yes, because right in the middle of his
career, right in the middle of his career as
deanship, we were building these research and
extension centers. So I had to, of course, in days
of early winter, he'd walk into the board meeting
and say, yeah, I want one there here. And gave a
listing of where they ought to be. But after that,
it had to be far more formal in the approach, and he
would help out. But we would talk about these
situations.
Did he, as far as you were aware, did he listen to
you, did Williams listen to you and the other
senior administrators? I think so. I think so.
What do you think his goals were for A&M?
What kind of school did he want this to be? Well, I
imagined
and perceived that he wanted Texas A&M University
to be a great university in the academic sense. Was
that consistent with what your goals were? That
was consistent with my goals. What did you have?
And I
think that the goals are still that. The
difference now compared to when I was there was the
fact that I did not want to leave my roots in
agriculture. And I see we're now losing our roots
in agriculture as an institution. What were your,
at that point, did you have any other institutions
that you, in agriculture, that you were kind of
using as your model? Cornell. Cornell.
Wisconsin. Maybe Davis, Les Davis though. When
you, when you first took over as an administrator,
about where do you think we honestly ranked in
agriculture nationally?
Oh, I'd say below the bottom. Not in the top ten.
And today? And I think after today, well, it was in
the top ten. It was definitely four or five, maybe
even higher than that, depending upon what you're
looking at it. And what were you asking? And did you
have any high priority projects, programs that
you wanted to get done? Well, the highest priority
project that I wanted to get done is essentially
turn and get established molecular biology and
what is known as biotechnology on the campus.
Where did you get the money for that? Well, you
stole it from other projects. You just closed out
other projects. I did this thing in a very
interesting way rather than doing as
currently situations where you bring in the
positions and then think
about them and think of a sort and then redo this. I
had, in my own mind, established a thought of where
we needed to go, and as a position occurred, if the
head of department didn't dream for it, I took that
position and put it in another department. And
during your years in that- Without saying
anything, I didn't, I was very quiet. I didn't have
a committee or anything of the sort. I just, it was
more of a individual type of administration.
where you did what you wanted to do by changing the
funding operation. Who were the key people you
turned to here on the campus and elsewhere for
advice and counsel and opinions?
Well, I think
the people that were around me in the
administration. Heads of departments. Bill
Pope. Terry Greathouse when he came in. At least I
try ideas on them. Various heads of departments.
Hobgood. That's Merle Hobgood? No. What's his
name? Price? Price Hobgood. Price Hobgood.
And your key staff members at that time were, were
whom? Well I have, actually some of the key staff
members would seem to be in and around, well it was
O.D. and there was Perry Atkinson and these people
before they went up into administration were
people that I would listen to. The, and under
Williams In hindsight, so real progress is made,
then, am I correct? That's correct. But you see,
that was also the time in which the enrollment was
increasing and the funding was increasing. So
there was the opportunity to develop because you
had new programs and developing and then the
growth of the university. All right, and then
Williams has a heart attack. were you aware that he
was in bad health no i surely wasn't either and i saw
him on